Your browser's dev tools
are incredibly useful for
visualizing how exactly
the cascade is working.
So I know you have experience with
dev tools, you've used them before.
But you may not realize what you're
looking at when you track down
styling with dev tools.
So what I'd like to show you now is how
this winds up working when you were
looking at, in this case,
somebody else's code.
We put it into dev tools and
we can see the cascade in action.
Where we're going to focus
is on this purple line here,
which says a tree needs to be your
friend if you're going to paint him.
And of course,
you can refer to the HTML and
CSS here,
these are the files that come from GitHub.
And you can see that on line 25 in
the HTML, we have a strong element.
It has a class of tree,
it has an inline style associated with it.
There's also styles over here in
the external style sheet that are also
affecting this particular item.
And while we can read the CSS and
eventually figure out what's going on,
dev tools are much faster and
way more visual.
So let's dig into that now.
I am using Firefox, you are welcome to
use Chrome or any of the other browsers
with their browser tools,
you'll find similar types of tools there.
So I am going to visualize this.
I'm gonna to visualize this here in
Firefox by going to Tools > Browser Tools
> Web Developer Tools.
I have my developer tools configured to
show up on the left side of the screen.
You may have your own developer tools
configured to show up somewhere else.
And I am just gonna make them
a little bit bigger here.
So we're gonna track down,
first of all, through the HTML,
the target that we want to investigate.
So here in our developer tools,
it's gonna be inside of the body.
Of course, the blue shading helps
you figure out where you are.
It's not the h1, not the paragraph, not
the paragraph, it's the third paragraph.
And then we wanna take a look at the tree.
And I'm going to click on that.
And when I click on that
particular HTML element,
you will see in your CSS window that
we have a whole series of styles
that start all the way down here
from the very bottom of the screen.
The very bottom of the screen is
our root declaration, that is,
our colors that we have that we may be
using inside of this particular document.
And as you see here, it says that
those are inherited from HTML.
HTML is the root element
in an HTML document, and so
that is what root is selecting
here in this context.
Then we have inherited from body,
and you'll see here that the body
is set to be trebuchet with
the line-height and a font-size.
But our font family has a line going
through it, which indicates that
somewhere later in our document,
we have overwritten this along the way.
So while our line-height and our font-size
are continuing to inherit from the body,
we've overwritten that
font family later on.
Then we're going to go through,
all of the next group of styles here
are all coming from somewhere
inside of the author environment.
And so these are sorted in order of
specificity as you can see here.
We start with our border-box declaration,
which has the universal selector,
has no specificity, and before and
after, which are pseudo elements,
so they have a specificity of 001.
We then go to our strong element,
just a plain old element 001.
It had a color of pink, but
that's been overwritten.
As you can see,
it was overwritten by tree, tree,
which has a higher specificity here.
To this, we have added display block and
we are displaying it in purple.
Then we're going on to a very specific
selector, p:nth-of-type(3) strong.
We've told it to display as normal.
But then, inside of the element
that comes the last part here,
as you see over on the side,
it indicates that we are in line.
This is an inline style.
Inline styles are gonna beat anything
that's coming from the external style
sheet or what is embedded.
And so there are p:nth-of-type(3)
strong with a font weight of normal.
It's beaten then by an inline style,
which, in this case,
says bold bang important.
So it's going to override that, and
the font family is also located here.
So that is why a tree needs to be your
friend if you're going to paint him.
It's in fact, Georgia, it's bold, it's
display blocks, so it's on its own line.
It has a color of purple, and
it's displaying as a border-box
with a line-height of 1.5 and
a font-size of 1.2rem.
Basically, we have to go through
this document and we have to add up
all of those styles distributed
over all of those different rules.
To finally come up with and
create the style that
is displayed here inside
of the web browser.
This is a relatively straightforward
example of how this works.
The more external style sheets you have,
the more inline styles you have,
the more embedded styles you have,
the more complicated this
process may wind up being.
But your browser is showing you here,
inside of your CSS window,
all of its work.
It's showing you all of
the math that it's doing and
it is showing you why what is
winning happens to be winning.
And it's not necessarily a single
style rule by itself that wins,
it's parts of many different style
rules that add together to give
you this final look here on the webpage.